Relationship, descended from grandfather, uncle, cousin
Hannah Ayscough, 1623 - 1679, married April 1642 (aged 19)
Isaac born 1606, died in October 1642, aged 36

256 sets of great-great...grandparents
2 sets
at least 512/th of his genes

Richard, great-grandfather is an illiterate farm labourer
Robert grandfather buys manor
Isaac father 
yeoman farmer, who might perhaps be called gentry since he was the lord of a minor manor.

his son owns his own farm, and can read, and marries a wealthy bride.

Birth on Christmas Day (old style) 1642, at 1 or 2 a.m.
Premature birth, tiny baby
Maidservants sent to get doctor did not hurry, they though he would die.

But he didn't die. Not then. Not until 20 March 1726 | 31 March 1727, at the age of 84.

His father is dead, born on Christmas day.
Our father which art in Heaven


Alternative facts, my pet conspiracy theory:
- Let's imagine that the baby died
  Let's imagine that dead souls are released from this astral plane and can discover the whole of creation
  Let's imagine that the soul of baby Isaac Newton was able to apprehend the whole of creation...
  ... and that the doctor, when he arrived and rubbed the baby's cooling body with salves and sweet-smelling towels, forces the baby's soul back into its body

  What sort of memories could a baby only a few hours old retain of this experience? What sort of life would a human with such powerful but inaccessible memories live?


Reverend Barnabas Smith b 1582, 41 years older - 1653 (Isaac is 11)
63 years old
 => Benjamin, Mary and Hannah

Growing Isaac raised by his grandmother Margery, hates stepfather (and by extension mother) "Threatening my father and mother to burn them and the house over them."

William, Hannah's brother is legal tutor for Isaac.

At 12, sent as to King's School Grantham, a grammar school, lived with Clarke the local apothecary. House of treasures.
Asocial and good with his hands, fascinated by Mysteryes of Nature and Art
Builds a windmill for the apothecary's daughter, powered by a mouse when there is no wind.

Grammar school: learns Latin, Greek, arithmetic and geometry. Not a brilliant student. Lazy, too busy making toys.

Taken away from school to become a farmer, lets goats escape and eat the crops, too busy reading.

Returns to school,  Gets into a fight with a bright bully, and wins, becomes top student as in order to beat bully in classwork too, then can't be bothered any more.

Sent to Trinity College, Cambridge 1661

Another apple tree

---

History and religion

In the year in which Isaac was born, civil war had broken out in England.

The King was Charles I, son of James VI and I, first king of both Scotland and England, and also Ireland. At that time kings ruled by Divine Right: by the will of God, and in theory, they had absolute power. In practice, they could not raise money through taxes without support of the English Parliament. Parliament - made up of rich landowners and nobles - could write acts and statutes and laws, but they had no legal power to enforce them. The power came from the king.    

King Charles wanted to unite the three kingdoms. The English parliament did not. In religious matters, the king and parliament had very different views, for historical reasons. The King decided to rule without a parliament for 11 years, which meant he had no money to fight any wars. But uniting kingdoms meant reforming religious practices, and this led to armed resistance from the Scots and the Irish, and one thing led to another and eventually parliament decided that King Charles was a traitor to his own country and cut off his head in 1649.

His son, also Charles (Charles II) became king at the age of 29, and fighting continued, but in 1651, England was declared a republic (or a military dictatorship) under Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector, and Charles fled to Holland. When Oliver Cromwell died, elections for parliament were held, and enough royalists were elected to enable Charles to be restored as king in 1660.

The year before Isaac Newton went to Cambridge.

The actual battles and changes of political leadership don't seem to have had much effect on the growing Isaac, but religious matters did.

You've got Catholics and Presbyterians, Calvinists and Lutherans, Anglicans and Quakers, Ranters, Baptists, Diggers, Levellers, ... and most importantly, you've got the Reverend Barnabus Smith, whom the young Isaac hated.

You've also got the rise of a new kind of thought: what we now call science. Science had become dangerous enough that on 26 February 1616, Galileo was forced by the Catholic church to deny that the Earth moved around the sun.

Galileo talks about two great works: the book of God (the Bible) and the work of God. The Holy Spirit shows us how to make it to Heaven, but it shows us nothing about how the heavens are made.

Given that Newton is first and foremost known for his work as a scientist, you might imagine that he rejected religion altogether to focus on knowledge. Or perhaps you already know that you couldn't be more wrong.

When Isaac goes to Cambridge, the prevailing wisdom is based on the teachings of Aristotle, who had died almost 2000 years earlier. Aristotle's logic was based on what we might now call "Thought Experiments". For example: dropping a stone from a mast.

Galileo 

Aristotle
Galileo
Descartes

Telescope
    Light
    Gravity
    Calculus
Alchemy
Religion - Antitrinitarianism | Moses | Pythagoras

Mint
Counterfeiters


the best is a toad suspended by the legs in a chimney for three days, which at last vomited up earth with various insects in it, on to a dish of yellow wax, and shortly after died. Combining powdered toad with the excretions and serum made into lozenges and worn about the affected area drove away the contagion and drew out the poison.