You like dinosaurs. Do you know the story of Mary Anning?

I will tell you her story, and show you pictures. If you don't understand, please ask me to tell you again.

Mary was born in 1799. She had an older brother called Joseph. Joseph was born in 1796. Her father was called Richard. He made furniture: tables and chairs, cupboards for the kitchen and wardrobes for clothes in the bedroom. Mary's mother's name was also Mary, but her father called her Molly. They lived in a house near the sea, in a town called Lyme Regis, in the south of England.

Her father was not rich. England was fighting a war with Napoleon, and life was hard. The Anning family lived very close to the sea. There was a beach with many stones where they liked to walk. There were tall cliffs. When the wind was strong it made big waves, and the waves of the sea would break big stones off the cliff. Mary and her brother and her father saw that some stones were very strange shapes.

Nobody knew about dinosaurs then. There was not yet a word for "dinosaur". In 1842, a professor in London called Richard Owen invented the word "dinosaur", but when Mary, and Joseph and Richard Anning were walking together on the beach, Richard Owen was still a baby. The Anning family invented names for their strange stones, like Snake Stones, Lady Fingers, Verteberries and Devil's Toenails. They put a table on the street outside their house, and they sold the stones to visitors from other towns.

In 1810, when Mary was 11 years old and Joseph was 14, their father became ill and died. The family did not have any money at all, so Joseph and Mary went to the beach to look for stones to sell. One day, Joseph found a really amazing stone. It was the shape of the head of an animal – an animal that no-one had ever seen before, an animal with no name. It was over a metre long. Mary was good at drawing. She liked to draw her dog, too. Her dog was called Tray.

Every day, she looked for strange shapes in the rocks in the cliffs. One she found a big stone that had fallen from the cliff, near where Joseph had found the stone that looked like a head. She could see shapes like bones on the stone. She told Tray to sit by the stone, and not move. She went into the town to find men to help her carry it home. Tray was still sitting by the stone when she came back with the men.

With her father's tools, she worked on the stone carefully until she could see the skeleton of a strange animal. She and Joseph had found the first dinosaur. A rich man called Henry Henley bought the skull and the skeleton and it was put in a museum. Later, scientists gave the name "icthyosaurus" - fish lizard - to this animal. It was like a dolphin. Icthyosaurs lived from 250 to 90 million years ago, in the Mesozoic Era. The first icthyosaurs lived before the first dinosaurs.

Plesiosaur
Belemnite
Dapedium
Dimorphodon
Pterosaur
Squaloraja

After that, many people came to buy the fossils that she found. She opened a fossil shop. Rich people bought the fossils that she found, and they wrote books that made them famous. But Mary Anning never became rich or famous during her life.

Now it's your turn. You can use these pictures and tell me everything you can remember. If you don't know a word, you can ask me.

Now the story to your mother.